


Zapatistas! - LANIC
















Zapatistas!

Documents of the New Mexican Revolution









.


Chapter Selector:
        Home
        Readme Me
        Anti-Copyright
        Preface
        Introduction
        Chiapas
        Chapter 1
        Chapter 2
        Chapter 3
        Chapter 4
        Chapter 5
        Chapter 6
        Chapter 7
        Chapter 8
        Chapter 9
        Chapter 10
        Chapter 11
        Chapter 12
        Timeline
        Glossary
        Contacts
        Index
        Colophon









Table of Contents

Home-Zapatistas!
Readme Me
Anti-Copyright
Preface
Introduction
Chiapas
Chapter 1
Chapter 2
Chapter 3
Chapter 4
Chapter 5
Chapter 6
Chapter 7
Chapter 8
Chapter 9
Chapter 10
Chapter 11
Chapter 12
Timeline
Glossary
Contacts
Index
Colophon





Print-Friendly

Chapter 6: Building Ties

Section 1

Solidarity Letters

[These letters were written in response to letters received by the EZLN
as they were preparing for the dialogue. Several groups offered their solidarity,
as well as sending pleas for peace. These responses continue the EZLN's
efforts to reach beyond the mountains of the Mexican Southeast.]

A Letter of Introduction
February 8, 1994

To the national weekly Proceso:
To the national newspaper La Jornada:
To the national newspaper El Financiero:
To the local newspaper of San Cristóbal de las Casas, Chiapas,
Tiempo:

Gentlemen:

Here I give you another series of letters that the CCRI-CG of the EZLN
sends to various recipients. I hope that you have time to make sure they
arrive to their addressees.

I understand your desperation (and that of your editorial chiefs for
the high expenses in hotels, restaurants and gas stations) over the delay
in the initiation of the dialogue. It is not our fault (or the Commissioner's),
or putting on airs to make ourselves wanted. It is not over disagreements
in the agenda or anything like that. It is because we still lack details
on the security of our delegates, details that we must take care of in
order to avoid ugly "surprises." In short: serenity and patience, lots
of patience.

As a consolation I will tell you that the dialogue will not be in the
jungle. Among other things because there [in the jungle] those who can
communicate through satellite would have the advantage, since telephone
or fax, forget it. And, if time is on the side of the small ones, we prefer
democracy and the equality of opportunity for the communications media,
and that the news should not be only for the powerful.

Good health and patience,

From the mountains of the Mexican Southeast,
Insurgent Subcommander Marcos

Section 2

A Thank-You to the
University Student Council of UNAM

February 6, 1994

To the University Student Council (Consejo Estudiantil Universitario,
CEU), National Autonomous University of Mexico, (Universidad Nacional Autónoma
de Me'xico, UNAM), Mexico City:

Compan~eros and Compan~eras:

We received your letter of January 29, 1994 signed by Angel Gómez
C. We thank you for the thoughts you send us.

The majority of us are Indigenous, illiterate and discriminated against.
We had no opportunity to finish even elementary school. We would have wanted
not only to finish elementary school and junior high, but to have reached
college.

We gladly receive your greetings and support, men and women who struggle
in other lands and through different ways to achieve the same freedoms,
democracy, and justice that we all long for. We know that in other times
the brave voice of Mexican students has made the evil government tremble,
and that if your voice were to be united with ours and with that of all
of the dispossessed, nothing would remain standing of this gigantic lie
that they make us swallow every day, every night, in death and life, always.
That is why we want to address you, men and women students of Mexico, to
respectfully ask you something:

If it were possible for you to organize, and once things calm down a
bit, for you to come to our mountains to visit us and chat with us and
to help us with what you know of technology and writing and all that comes
in books that never come our way. We do not want you to come to politicize
us or to pull us into one or another political current. In this I think
that you would be more likely to learn from us what a truly democratic
and participatory organization is. But you can help us cut the coffee,
prepare the corn field, and in the community work of our villages. You
can help us learn to read and write, to improve our health and nutrition,
to use techniques that get more from the land. You can come to teach us
and to learn. You can come even for only a few days so you get to know
this part of Mexico that already existed before January 1 and in spite
of it...

If you were to accept our invitation then you would need to send some
delegates, so that through an intermediary we come to agree on the details,
because we need to organize everything very well so spies of the evil government
will not come in. It does not matter if you cannot come, brother and sister
students, but continue struggling in your land so there will be justice
for the Mexican people.

That is all, men and women students of Mexico. We await your written
response.

Respectfully,
From the mountains of the Mexican Southeast,

CCRI-CG of the EZLN

P.S.: Sup's section: "The recurrent postscript"

P.S. to the P.S. of the CEU that said: To Sup Marcos: "Do not worry,
we will take the Zócalo for you." I have told the CCRI-CG that Mexico
City is on the other side of the world and there aren't enough fighters,
and furthermore, as I-
don't-remember-who said, guerrillas that take zócalos sooner
or later become hamburgeoisie [a play on words combining hamburger and
bourgeoisie]. By the way, and taking advantage of the trip, bring two hamburgers
without onions or ketchup. Thanks.

P.S. to the previous P.S.: Since we are on postscripts, which of all
the CEU's is the one that writes us? When I was a good-looking 25-
year-old (Hey! Tell the computer at the Attorney General's office [Procuraduría
General de la Republica, PGR] to calculate that) there were at least three
CEU's. Did they finally unite?

P.S. to the P.S. of the P.S.: In case that you, oof!, took the Zócalo,
do not be uncool and set a piece apart to sell handicrafts because I could
suddenly become an unemployed "professional in violence," and it always
is better to be a sub-
employed "professional in violence" because of that NAFTA stuff, you
know.

P.S. to the nth power: These postscripts really are a letter disguised
as postscripts (because of the PGR and etceteras with their dark, well-built
glasses) and, but of course, do not require a response, or return address,
or addressee (there are indisputable advantages to letters disguised as
postscripts).

Nostalgic P.S.: When I was young (Hey? PGR? Here is some more information.)
there was a lightly wooded field located more or less between the Central
Library, the College of Philosophy and Literature, the Humanities Tower,
Insurgents Avenue and the internal drive of the University Campus (Ciudad
Universitaria, CU). We used to call that space, for reasons known to those
initiated, the "valley of passions." It was assiduously visited by various
elements of the fauna populating the CU from 7 p.m. onwards (the time at
which good consciences drink chocolate and the bad ones get like water
boiling [hot and bothered]) from the areas of humanities, sciences, and
others (are there others?). At that time, a Cuban (Hello? Ambassador Jones?
Take note of more proof of pro-Castroism.) who lectured in front of a piano
the color of his skin, and went by the name of Snowball, would repeat:

You cannot have conscience and heart...

P.S. of finale fortissimo: Did you notice the exquisitely cultured and
delicate tone of these postscripts? Are they not worthy of our entering
the First World? Doesn't it make you realize that such transgressors prepare
themselves to be competitive in NAFTA?

P.S. of happy end: All right, all right, I'm going... But it's because
that airplane has me fed up, and the guard, for a change, fell asleep,
and someone is tired of repeating "Who's there?" and I tell myself that
it is the country...and you?
 
Section 3 

To the Civic Front of Mapastepec
February 8, 1994

To The Civic Front of Mapastepec (Frente Cívico Mapastepec),
Mapastepec, Chiapas:

Brothers and Sisters:

We want to tell you our word. We received your letter dated February
6, 1994.

The great majority of the presidents of Chiapaneco townships are the
result of electoral fraud, of the trampling of popular will. All the municipal
presidents in Chiapas should resign or be deposed. In their place, municipal
councils should be democratically elected by those who are governed. Collective
government is better than the government of one person, but it must be
democratic. If the state government substitutes a president imposed by
a municipal council equally imposed, then the anti-democratic council must
also fall. This must be so until the just will of the majority is respected.

The EZLN supports, without conditions, the just demands of the people
of Mapastepec who struggle for an authentic democracy, and the demands
of all the popular forces which, now and in the future, struggle against
the arbitrariness of imposed municipal presidents. The demand for municipal
democracy is already part of the list of Zapatista demands.
Out with the imposed municipal presidents!
Long live the democratic municipal councils!

Respectfully,

From the mountains of the Mexican Southeast,
CCRI-CG of the EZLN
 
Section 4 

To the Municipal President of
J. Sixto Verduzco, Michoacán
February 8, 1994

To Citizen Mario Robledo, Municipal President
Township of J. Sixto Verduzco, Michoacán, Mexico:

Brother:

We received your letter dated February 5, 1994. We are very happy to
receive your greeting from Michoacán. But our happiness is even
greater knowing that there are, in some municipal presidencies of this
country, brave and honorable people, people who walk with truth and prudence.
These people exist and it is good that they are in government if their
villages order them there. Because what comes from respect for the will
of others is a good path for all.

We, little men and women, have taken the task of being big, to live
this way even if we are dying. We saw that in order to be big, we must
look at all those suffering in this land and go walk with them. And we
saw that we couldn't. And we saw that we couldn't stop being brothers and
sisters in peace and justice. And we saw that it is the evil government
that separates our steps. We saw that it is for good and truthful men to
struggle for the government to change. We saw that they wouldn't change
willingly. And we saw them take up arms. And all this we saw and so we
did it.

But we also saw that it is not only the mouth of fire that attains freedom.
We saw that other mouths need to open and scream so that the powerful tremble.
We saw that the struggles are many, and many are the colors and languages
of those that struggle. And we saw that we were not alone. And we saw that
we will not die alone.

Good health Michoacán brothers!

That the struggle does not end! Let hope not die!

Respectfully,

From the mountains in the Mexican Southeast,
CCRI-CG of the EZLN
 
Section 5

To The Supreme Council of Indian Peoples
February 8, 1994

To the Supreme Council of Indian Peoples (Consejo Supremo de Pueblos
Indios):
To the National Coordinator of Indian Peoples (Coordinadora Nacional
de Pueblos Indios, CNPI), Tenochtitlán, Mexico City:

Brothers and Sisters:

We want to speak our words to you. We received your letter dated February
5. Our heads bow from the honor of receiving the truthful words that you
send us. Our arms are down in order to listen to the words of our Indigenous
and Mexican brothers from the whole country. The wisdom of your thoughts
is great in reminding the whole world that Mexico belongs to Mexicans.
Our essence is the community, mutual aid, justice, freedom, and dignity.

We, as Indian people, Mayan and Mexican, unite our forces and our thoughts
with the great word of truth hoisted by the National Coordinator of Indian
Peoples. Let us not allow our dignity to be offered in the great market
of the powerful! If we lose our dignity we lose everything. Let the struggle
be happiness for all our brothers and sisters. Let our hands and steps
come together in the path of truth and justice.

Long live the Mexican eagle and the Zapata of its coat of arms, brothers
and sisters of the CNPI!

Long live the unity of those who struggle for justice!
Freedom! Justice! Democracy!

Respectfully,

From the mountains of the Mexican Southeast,
CCRI-CG of the EZLN

Section 6

To the National Plan de Ayala Coordinating Committee
February 8, 1994
To the National Plan de Ayala Coordinating Committee (Coordinadora
Nacional Plan de Ayala, CNPA):

Brothers and Sisters:

We received your letter dated February 5, 1994 and we wanted to share
with you some things and thoughts of ours.

We salute the independent and true struggle of the National Plan de
Ayala Coordinating Committee. We thank you for the unconditional support
of our just struggle declared in your brave and determined pronouncement.
The Indigenous peoples, the poor campesinos, and agricultural laborers,
united, will completely change the agrarian system of exploitation and
scorn that exists in our country. From the unity of our strength will surge
a new Mexican countryside, more just and equitable, where the severe gaze
of General Emiliano Zapata will watch, so that oppression will not be repeated
under another name.

Campesino brothers of the CNPA, it will be a great honor for us to be
able to talk with you and listen to your words of truth and justice. With
humility and attention we will stand before you who have struggled so long
for land and liberty. We, small people of the land, will listen to the
word of your great independent organization.

Good health brothers and sisters of the CNPA!
Long live Emiliano Zapata and the organizations that honor his name!

Down with the Salinista reforms to Article 27 of the Constitution!

Respectfully,

From the mountains of the Mexican Southeast,
CCRI-CG of the EZLN

Section 7

To the Regional Liberation Association for Human, Economic, Social,
and Political Rights
February 8, 1994

To the Regional Liberation Association for Human, Economic, Social and
Political Rights (Asociación Regional Liberación en Pro de
los Derechos Humanos, Económicos, Sociales y Políticos AC,
Arelidh):

C. Lucrecia Ortega Sanchez, Administrative Director:

The Clandestine Revolutionary Indigenous Committee-General Command of
the Zapatista National Liberation Army respectfully addresses you to thank
you for your letter dated February 7, 1994, in which you tell us of your
agreement to form the peace
belt around the dialogue table between our
EZLN and the federal government.

We know that your organization has remained neutral in the present conflict
and that it has always been concerned with providing help to alleviate
the grave conditions of the civilian population, as well as to strengthen
efforts toward peace. We salute this with respect, since honesty goes,
invariably, with neutrality and the enthusiasm for peace with justice.
We thank you, in advance, for extending the invitation that you accepted
to other NGO's [non-governmental organizations], since so far you are the
only ones who have answered and accepted.

We are asking Mr. Samuel Ruiz García, bishop of San Cristóbal
de las Casas and the National Commissioner of Mediation, that when the
date and location of the dialogue are determined, he promptly contact you
so you will know in advance.

Respectfully,

From the mountains of the Mexican Southeast,
CCRI-CG of the EZLN

Section 7

To the Children of Beatriz Hernández Elementary School
February 8, 1994

To the Solidarity Committee of the Boarding School of Elementary Education
No. 4, "Beatriz Hernández" (Comite' de Solidaridad del Internado
de Educación Primaria Num. 4, "Beatriz Hernández"):

Boys and Girls:

We received your letter dated January 19, 1994 and the poem Plegaria
de Paz [Prayer of Peace] that came with the letter. We are happy that boys
and girls living so far away from our mountains and misery are concerned
that peace come to our land in Chiapas. We thank you very much for your
short letter.

We want you, and the noble people who are your teachers, to know that
we did not pick up guns because of a taste for killing and dying, that
we do not seek war because we do not want peace. We were living without
peace; our children are boys and girls like yourselves, but infinitely
more poor. For our boys and girls there are no schools or medicine, there
are no clothes or food, there is no dignified roof where we can keep our
poverty. For our boys and girls there is only work, ignorance and death.
The land we have is worthless. In order to get anything for our children
we go out to find pay in the land of others, the powerful, and they pay
us poorly for our work. Our children must work from a very young age in
order to get some food, clothes, and medicine. The toys of our children
are the machete, the ax, and the hoe. Playing and suffering, they go out
in search of firewood, to cut the forest, and sow, as soon as they can
barely walk. They eat the same as we eat: corn, beans and chilies. They
cannot go to school and learn Spanish because the work kills the whole
day and sickness kills the night. That is how our boys and girls have lived
and died for 501 years. We, their fathers, their mothers, their brothers
and sisters, no longer wanted to be guilty of doing nothing. We sought
peaceful solutions to attain justice and we found taunts, we found prison,
we found blows, and we found death. We always found pain and sorrow. So
we had to take the path of war, because what we asked for with our voices
was never listened to. And, boys and girls of Jalisco, we do not ask for
handouts and charity. We ask for justice: a fair salary, a piece of good
land, a dignified house, a school of truths, medicine that cures, bread
on our tables, respect for our culture, freedom to say what we think and
freedom to open our mouths so that the words will unite us with others
in peace and without death. That is what we have always asked for, boys
and girls, and they did not listen to what our voices clamored for. And
then we took up arms in our hands, then we made the tools of work into
tools of struggle, and then they waged war on us, the war that killed us
without you knowing about it, boys and girls of Jalisco. We turned it against
them, the big, the powerful, those who have it all and deserve nothing.

That is why, boys and girls of Jalisco, we started our war. That is
why the peace that we want is not the same one that we had before, because
it was not peace, it was death and scorn, it was sorrow and pain, it was
shame. That is why we tell you, with respect and affection, boys and girls
of Jalisco, to raise the flag of peace with dignity and write poems of
Plegaria a una Vida Digna [Prayer for a Dignified Life] and seek, above
all, the justice that is for everybody equally or for no one.

Good Health boys and girls of Jalisco.

From the mountains of the Mexican Southeast,
CCRI-CG of the EZLN
 
Section 8 

On Addressing Communications to the Press
February 11, 1994

To El Sur, 21st Century Journalism newspaper:
Attention Jesu's García, Claudia Martínez Sánchez,
Pablo Gómez Santiago:

Gentlemen:

I received your letter dated February 9, 1994. Ooof! If you report with
half the aggressiveness of the letter you sent me, when this country really
becomes free and just you will win the National Prize for Journalism. I
accept that you are calling me to task (in reality it is a scolding, but
this morning I woke up feeling diplomatic). I would like it if, in the
middle of your full indignation, you could find the space to listen to
me.

We are at war. We took up arms against the supreme government. They
are looking for us to kill us, not just to interview us. We confess that
we do not know of El Sur, 21st Century Journalism, but you confess that
it is something difficult to reproach us for, surrounded as we are, without
food and under constant threat from armed aircraft. Fine, we have mutually
confessed. A lot of honest journalists have come to the jungle, some not
so honest, and others who are not even journalists but present themselves
as such. We must mistrust all whom we do not directly know because, I repeat,
the government wants to take our picture...dead. I know that for the "professionals
in violence" death is a natural consequence, but there is a big difference
between knowing this and helping the enemy. I am not trying to move you,
I only want you to understand the conditions in which we found and find
ourselves. We have very little room for maneuvering and, paradoxically,
we need now more than ever to contact the media that tells the truth. The
entrance and exit of journalists through our lines is a strong blow to
our security system, and there exists the risk that in the entrance or
exit, the workers of the communications media will suffer from an attack
and our forces will be blamed. I do not consider myself to have been interviewed
enough. In fact, the interview published by La Jornada is the only one
I have given in my life, and I think that there are a lot of gaps that
the journalists of that publication left open and that could have been
filled with questions which were not asked. So I am not behaving as a debutante
who "chooses" whom and that not to address with his honorable word. I am
simply taking into consideration that wherever I make myself present, I
place all who are present, and those who arrive, at extra risk. We are
behaving like what we are, people persecuted by the government, not by
journalists.

Anyway, if you had begun with the support that the San Cristóbal
newspaper Tiempo gives you, you would have saved yourselves the just indignation
that fills the three pages of fax that I received. For me, the word of
Tiempo is enough to accept the honesty of someone, so I am sending a letter
to the National Commissioner of Mediation, Bishop Samuel Ruiz García,
to give you a pass to cross our lines and take the pictures that you want
and conduct the interviews that you can (remember, please, that we are
at war). I solemnly promise that as soon as it is possible, I will have
the honor of receiving you personally and replying to your questions, if
they can be answered.

Until that improbable day arrives, I send you this writing. All right,
there it goes, without any prior anesthesia, the writing titled...

Reasons and Non-Reasons Why We Say Yes to Some Media

When the bombs were falling on the mountains south of San Cristóbal
de las Casas, when our combatants resisted the attacks of the federal troops
in Ocosingo, when our troops regrouped after the attack on the Rancho Nuevo
barracks, when we were fortifying ourselves in Altamirano and Las Margaritas,
when the air smelled of powder and blood, the CCRI-CG of the EZLN called
me and told me, more or less: 'We must speak our words so that others will
hear. If we don't do it now, others will take our voice and lies will come
from our mouth without our wanting them to. Look for ways to give our truth
to others who want to listen to it.' That is how the CCRI-CG put me in
charge of seeking communication media that could publish what was really
happening and what we were thinking. As I have said before, newspapers
do not come to the mountains. What does come are the airwaves of radio
stations (most of them government-run). As a result, we had to decide whom
to address based on the previous experiences that we had. We had to consider
a number of things: First, the publication of our communique's would bring
a logical question to the media that would receive them: Were these communique's
authentic? In other words, were they really from those who took up arms,
or forged? Afterwards, suppose they answered "yes" (no one could say with
certainty that they were authentic), the key question would come: 'Should
we publish them?' To assume the authenticity of the communique's is already
a risk for the editorial committees of these media, but the responsibility
of publishing them implies many other things, so many that maybe only they
can tell that story of the decision to open up to a movement that no one,
beside ourselves, knew well. A movement whose origin was an enigma in the
best of cases, and a provocation in the worst. The EZLN had risen against
the supreme government, it had taken seven municipal seats, was fighting
with the Federal Army, and was formed, at the very least, by some Indigenous
people. This was a fact. But who was behind the EZLN? What did they really
want? Why through those means (the armed ones)? Who financed them? In short,
what was really going on? There must have been a thousand more questions.
Those media will some day tell the story (an important one, surely). We
thought about all of this and asked ourselves: Who will take all these
risks? The answer we gave ourselves was, more or less, this one: It will
be those media whose zeal to know the truth of what is happening is bigger
than their fear of the risks in finding it. Well, the answer was correct
(I think), but it did not solve anything. The most important thing was
missing: to decide on the recipient of those initial letters and communique's.
I will briefly narrate how and why the addressees that have appeared until
now began appearing. It is clear that these must now be expanded.

Tiempo: The decision to address this paper was unanimous in the CCRI-CG
of the EZLN and, you can say, by acclamation. You must remember that our
compan~eros do not take up arms just like that, in search of adventure.
They have traveled a long road of political, legal, economic, and peaceable
struggles. They know various local and state prisons and torture centers.
They also know who listened to them yesterday and who shut their doors
and ears. I have explained in a letter to a journalist of that publication
what Tiempo means to the Indigenous people of Chiapas, so I will not repeat
myself. However, deciding to put Tiempo among other addressees was not
easy. We were sure of the honesty and impartiality of these people, but
there was the problem of war, and in a war it is easy to confuse the lines
that divide one force from the other. I am not referring to the front line
only, but also the political and ideological lines that separate and confront
both sides. What do I mean? Simply, that by publishing our communique',
Tiempo could be accused, gratuitously for sure, of being a "spokesperson"
of the "transgressors of the law." For a large newspaper this could mean
problems, but for a small newspaper this could mean its certain disappearance.
In any case the compan~eros say: "Send it to Tiempo, if they don't publish
it, at least they deserve to know what's going on." That is part of the
story about the selection of Tiempo. What is missing, of course, is the
part about how the noble people of Tiempo decided to risk everything, to
the point of gambling their existence as a newspaper, and publish what
we sent them. Whatever that story may have been, we can do no less than
salute the braveness of that newspaper which, among all, was the one that
had the most to lose, if not everything. That is why the CCRI-CG of the
EZLN has always insisted that I send a copy of everything that we send
out to Tiempo.

After deciding on a local news medium to address, the problem of deciding
on a national news medium arose. Television was eliminated for obvious
reasons. For us the radio presented the problem of getting the material
to them without additional risks. Then there was the problem of the national
print media. You must remember that we did not know what was being said
in the press about what was going on; we were fighting in the mountains
and the cities. So, as I said earlier, we had to decide based on the record
that we had.

La Jornada: Then we evaluated what La Jornada had previously done. Its
editorial policy was, as we say today, plural. In other words, different
political and economic currents had space there. In that newspaper a wide
spectrum of interpretations of the national and international reality could
be, and still can be, appreciated. That is to say, that newspaper presents,
with quality, a very representative ideological mosaic of so-called Mexican
society. I think this is demonstrated in the gradual transition from the
harsh condemnation of the EZLN (remember the January 2, 1994 editorial)
to the critical analysis of what was happening. Mutatis mutando [all things
being equal], I think that is what happened with the so-called civil society:
From condemning us, it went to making an effort to understand us. There
is in La Jornada what used to be called the Left, Center, and Right, as
well as the multiple subdivisions that history makes and destroys. There
is healthy polemic of a high standard. In short, I think it is a good newspaper.
It is difficult to write it off as Leftist or Rightist or Centrist (although
the Mexican Anti-Communist Front (Frente Anti-
Comunista Mexicano) places it among the former). I think that this
myriad of editorial currents is an important part of the success of this
newspaper (and editorial success of a newspaper during my times as a journalist
meant the ability to put out the next issue). It was not the existence
of this ideological mosaic that made us decide to include La Jornada among
the addressees, however. What was decisive was the bravery and honesty
of its journalists. We have seen brilliant journalistic pages (fieldwork,
they used to call it) in articles and interviews in this newspaper. For
some strange reason, these journalists (and many others, I agree, but now
I am talking about La Jornada) are not satisfied with the official bulletins.
They are irksome (for those covered) to exhaustion in their zeal to know
what is happening. Furthermore, when something important (as they understand
it) happens, they are not satisfied to send a single journalist, but rather
form a true assault unit that begins to reveal diverse sides of the event
that they are covering. They have what, in my times, they used to call
total journalism, as if it was a movie with various cameras with different
focuses and angles of the same event. What is hypnotic in the movies, in
the press moves to reflection and analysis. Fighting still with fire and
lead, we thought that, maybe, they would want to know the face behind the
ski mask. I am not saying that others would not want to (including the
federal government), but now I am talking about this news medium. With
things this way, what makes us add the name of La Jornada to the addressees
is, above all, its journalistic team. There are other reasons less determinant,
such as the eventual or regular sections of "La Doble Jornada," "La Jornada
Laboral," "Perfil," and last but not least, "Histerietas" [sections in
La Jornada].

El Financiero: Somebody asked me why we choose a newspaper that specializess
in economic issues as our interlocutor. To say that El Financiero is a
finance newspaper is to miss the truth in the best of cases, and in the
worst it means that you haven't read it. El Financiero has, it is our understanding,
a serious and responsible team of columnists performing their journalistic
tasks. Its analysis is objective, and above all, very critical. The ideological
plurality of the articles that make up El Financiero is also a richness
that is difficult to find in other national newspapers. I mean it is a
balanced plurality. Its editorial policy is not satisfied with splashing
a critical pen among those aligned with the powerful. It opens real spaces
for incisive analysis of both sides. (I doubt that there are only two sides,
but the literary figure helps, I think.) Its journalistic team has the
instinct to dissect reality, which is what finally distinguishes a journalist
from an observer. El Financiero seems to tell us and show us that a social
event is a reflection of ("a reflection of?" I think I should say: "conditions
and is conditioned by") several economic, political and cultural aspects.
Like reading a history book, but of present and everyday history which,
by the way, is the most difficult history to read. When I was young and
beautiful, intellectuals tended to group around a publication, dig up positions,
entrench themselves, and throw truths to the ignorant world of the mortals.
In those times they called them the elites of the intelligentsia and there
were as many as there were magazines and ideological currents in fashion.
Publications to be read by those who published them. Lucha calls them "an
editorial masturbation." If you, innocent earthling, wanted to brush up
against these ivory towers, you had to follow a rough process. If any editorial
medium seems to distance itself from this elite journalism that pours off,
selects and eliminates, it is El Financiero. This national newspaper did
not react with the immediate condemnation of a movement that nobody understood,
it did not jump into intense intellectual study that affected, and affects,
other media. It waited, which in the art of war is the most difficult virtue
to learn; it investigated; it reported and, on a firmer base, it began
to weave that interdisciplinary analysis that its readers can now appreciate.
We did not know this until, some time later, an issue got to our hands.
We congratulated ourselves for a good choice, although, it is only fair
to acknowledge, we had nothing to lose. If for La Jornada it was the journalistic
team that made us decide, in El Financiero it was the editorial team (not
withstanding Mr. Pazos).

Proceso: For this weekly, it is worth repeating the apology for its
late inclusion among the addressees. The reason for this I have explained
elsewhere. I would like to recall an anecdote, of the many that run loose
in our minds and chats, of January 1, 1994: At dusk, a majority of the
civilian population, who had been curious and scandalized by what they
saw, with us in the municipal palace at San Cristóbal de las Casas,
had gone into their houses and hotels, scared by the insistent rumors that
the Federal Army would try to assault our positions in darkness. However,
one or two drunks for whom the New Year's party had gone on for 24 hours,
showed up. Keeping their balance with difficulty, they would address us,
asking what religious procession we were from because they saw many 'Indians'
in the central park. After we would tell them what was happening, they
would invite us to a useless sip from an empty bottle and they would leave,
staggering and discussing whether the procession was for the Virgin of
Guadalupe or for the Fiesta of Santa Lucía. People in their right
mind, or at least so they appeared, would also approach us. And then it
happened: Spontaneous war strategists and military advisors surged, telling
us how to run when the federal troops attacked us and avoid many losses,
because with respect to our defeat there was unanimity among them.

One of them, later in the night and when our troops were getting ready
to move to new positions before the assault on Rancho Nuevo, came up to
me and, with a tone more paternalistic than doctoral, told me: "Marcos,
you made a strategic mistake by initiating the war on a Saturday." I adjusted
my ski mask that, along with my eyelids, was beginning to droop over my
eyes, and ventured, timidly, "Why?"

"Look," says my impromptu advisor of military strategy, "The mistake
is that on Saturdays Proceso closes its edition and therefore the analysis
and truthful reports about your struggle will not come out until next week."
I continue fixing my ski mask, to give myself some time more than because
it was out of place. My military advisor from San Cristóbal adds,
relentless: "You should have attacked on Friday." I try, timidly, to argue
in my defense about the New Year's Eve dinner, the fireworks, the celebrations,
the etceteras that I don't remember now, but I must have been saying something,
because the character I had in front did not let me continue and interrupted
me, saying, "And now who knows if you will last until next week." There
was no pity in his tone. It was a lugubrious death sentence. He left, giving
me an understanding pat for my strategic blunder of attacking on a Saturday.
I have not read the Proceso of that week previous to January 1, but if
there is something on which the strategist was right that night, it is
in that in Proceso truthful analysis and reports do appear. I can add little
to the virtues that everyone points out in the journalistic work of this
weekly magazine recognized worldwide. It suffices to call attention to
the depth that is always present in the articles of Proceso, the diverse
focuses on a problem, whether it be national or international.

Others: I agree with you that there are other media, of equal or greater
value than those above mentioned. We will look into increasing the number
of addressees or, simply address the press in general. I believe that,
finally, this will be the wisest, since there are truly many and good news
media that do this: inform.

El Sur (Oaxaca): I repeat that we did not know about it. I counter-repeat
that we do not have the advantages of the Federal Army to give interviews
or press conferences, I arch-repeat that we are surrounded and at war.
But I propose a deal: Until a personal interview becomes possible, we could
advance something by mail. I know that an interview through letters is
not ideal for a reporter, but we could send something. Furthermore, I commit
myself to finding interviews with other officials of the EZLN, and this
without any requisite other than coming to Chiapas and picking up, at the
office of the National Commissioner of Mediation, the accreditation as
war journalists that the EZLN provides.

As you must know, the dialogue has not started. Maybe we are waiting
for you.

Well, journalists of El Sur of Oaxaca, I believe I must have bored you
enough. However it may be, the great advantage of this long letter is that
no medium will dare to publish it. All right.

Good health and a sincere embrace without rancor...agreed?

From the mountains of the Mexican Southeast,
Insurgent Subcommander Marcos

P.S.: Could you send us an issue of your newspaper? We solemnly promise
to pay for it in the improbable case that one day we have money. (Would
you accept letters instead of cash?)

Another P.S.: That airplane simply won't fall, and the water in the
pot evaporated while waiting. Why don't you bring some Oaxaca cheese when
you come? They say it is very tasty. We will provide the tortillas and
the hunger. You're welcome.

cc: Tiempo, San Cristóbal, Chiapas.
cc: La Jornada, Mexico City
cc: El Financiero, Mexico City
cc: Proceso, Mexico City






LANIC Home | Zapatistas!






