


Zapatistas! - LANIC
















Zapatistas!

Documents of the New Mexican Revolution









.


Chapter Selector:
        Home
        Readme Me
        Anti-Copyright
        Preface
        Introduction
        Chiapas
        Chapter 1
        Chapter 2
        Chapter 3
        Chapter 4
        Chapter 5
        Chapter 6
        Chapter 7
        Chapter 8
        Chapter 9
        Chapter 10
        Chapter 11
        Chapter 12
        Timeline
        Glossary
        Contacts
        Index
        Colophon









Table of Contents

Home-Zapatistas!
Readme Me
Anti-Copyright
Preface
Introduction
Chiapas
Chapter 1
Chapter 2
Chapter 3
Chapter 4
Chapter 5
Chapter 6
Chapter 7
Chapter 8
Chapter 9
Chapter 10
Chapter 11
Chapter 12
Timeline
Glossary
Contacts
Index
Colophon





Print-Friendly

Chapter 10: Returning to the Communities

Section 1

[These communique's and interviews are from the period during which the
Zaptistas brought the peace accord proposals to the communites to be discussed.]

The EZLN Denies That the Prisoners
in Cerro Hueco are Combatants

[La Jornada]
April 7, 1994

To the national and international press:

The Clandestine Revolutionary Indigenous Committee-General Command of
the EZLN declares the following:

First: In recent days we have learned that 21 civilians are prisoners
in the Cerro Hueco jail, under the unjust accusation of being part of our
Zapatista National Liberation Army.

Second: The CCRI-CG of the EZLN declares that, since the liberation
of the imprisoned combatants in the state of Chihuahua, it has no known
combatants in the jails of the evil government.

Third: The General Command of the EZLN has conscientiously checked the
lists of combatants, and the names of those unjustly imprisoned in the
jail in Cerro Hueco do not appear on them.

Fourth: The CCRI-CG of the EZLN denounces the evil government for trying
to cover its arbitrariness in the indiscriminate detention of civilians
during the conflict by accusing them, without any basis, of belonging to
our glorious Army.

Fifth: Keeping these innocents in jail is one of the obstacles to the
process of continuing the dialogue, since the EZLN cannot speak of peace
if the government speaks of war through the mouth of its actions.

Respectfully,

From the mountains of the Mexican Southeast,
Clandestine Revolutionary Indigenous Committee-
General Command of the Zapatista National Liberation Army
Mexico, April 1994.

Section 2

Interview with Marcos

[La Jornada, 4/10]
David Aponte, on assignment, Lacandona Jungle.

"The Zapatista National Liberation Army believes that the military-political
conditions for resuming our internal consultation on the government's compromise
for a dignified peace in Chiapas and the dialogue, with Commissioner Manuel
Camacho Solís, do not exist," declared Insurgent Subcommander Marcos
today.

In order to reactivate dialogue, the Clandestine Revolutionary Indigenous
Committee-General Command of the EZLN requires that the Mexican Army "loosen"
their presence in the region, and that the ranchers and farmers "lower"
their attitude of belligerence.

The military strategist of the EZLN also assured us that the Zapatistas
have not received any communication from Manuel Camacho Solís--neither
confidential nor public--as the ex-chancellor [Camacho Solís] confirmed.

In an interview with three reporters in a clearing of the Lacandona
Jungle, the subcommander made several commentaries about the public reappearance
of Camacho Solís and his points of view on the peace process.

In the beginning, Marcos believed that the political-military conditions
to restart the dialogue are not now present. There exist new Mexican Army
troop movements towards other zones of the region, he argued.

M: What they did was take it out of the press route. They did the retreat
on the side that the press covers--which is Tuxtla Gutie'rrez, San Cristóbal
de las Casas, Ocosingo, Altamirano and Las Margaritas--and they went around
Arriaga, for one part, and by Villahermosa and Tenosique, for the other.
Five days ago approximately 30 large trucks of 8 and 12 tons came down
from Tenosique, with approximately 1,000, 1,200 soldiers, on the border
highway.

Q: Do you believe that the troop movements are for relief, or that they
are increasing their troops?

M: Within the relief. What they do is relocate the parachutists and
minesweepers, they take them on a circle through the press, and they put
them in the back. The parachutists are rangers, counter-guerrillas. And
in military terms, that means to put the minesweepers and the parachutists
there, and the functioning of the hammer and the anvil are reversed. Now
[the hammer] will be on the border and the anvil here.

I think that here they play a lot, and the play is to get into the stream
bed (the Lacandona Jungle), dominate the highways, and put the anvil there.
I don't think that they will risk putting the anvil in Ocosingo, Altamirano,
and Las Margaritas, because it would be noticed, and they don't want it
to be noticed.

Q: What is their plan then? Are they contemplating an offensive?

M: Of isolation, of taking the guerrillas out of the social discourse,
that we stop declaring, that we stop doing what we are doing now. Take
us out of this stream bed. But the movement of troops here will have to
be very fast for us to leave. What was once planned on this side is to
put the minesweepers and the parachutists, who are the Green Berets, to
deactivate the mines. They are counterinsurgency units that enter to clash
and locate you.

The units that they use are 12 to 15 people. We are talking about around
5,000 soldiers, a division. One air-transported division now following
the gringo model for a rapid intervention.

Then initially they move in this line--Ocosingo, Altamirano, Las Margaritas.
In the landing strips here, the restored one at Altamirano, and the one
of Las Margaritas, they took out the commercial flights and set up a barracks
and they launch it and start to push us over there (the border with Guatemala)
and there is the anvil. In this case it will be the Kaibiles [elite unit
of the Guatemalan Army]. If the Mexican Army loosens there then we would
face the Kaibiles. Then the Kaibiles make the anvil.

In that sense they would publish in the newspapers that the soldiers
had left and the journalists would see them pass through San Cristóbal
de las Casas, but they turn around and make a change of troops.

Q: Does the government have a double politic? Camacho spoke of coordinating
the interests of peace, an allusion to the ranchers.

M: Yes, I think that he was going to try to incorporate the ranchers
into some part of the dialogue because they had already proposed it to
him, that they wanted to speak with us. And since they know that we have
not yet invaded the farms, maybe they could take advantage of that--make
an arrangement and resolve the problem of the ranches, because there was
a war tax, and negotiate in some way the possessing of the land.

The Army publicly maintains that they are loosening their military position,
but actually they are simply moving troops around--not increasing their
troops but simply changing their placement and composition. This is the
last report that came to me yesterday [Friday, April 7].

Q: I don't understand. What does the government want: to continue the
dialogue or prepare for a definitive offensive?

M: No, they want to continue the consultations; the consultations are
now suspended. What they want to know is what the people will say, and
maintain the military position depending of the result of the consultations:
loosen the military pressure to go on to the negotiation.

Q: You don't know whether they will continue if the conditions are appropriate?

M: No, definitely not under these conditions. It seemed possible, since
the committee saw a military loosening, but then we saw that the exterior
line did not check out with them leaving. Our reports from the exterior
line told us that they [the soldiers] did not leave the state. And then
reports came to us that they were entering on the other side, and since
there was no other movement anywhere else in the country, then they must
be the same soldiers moving from one side to another.

For the moment there is no change in the situation. What happened to
Colosio caused the suspension of the consultations. We said, then, here
is all of the pretext they need. It seems like now the paranoia is clearing
up and that it was not about us, but an internal plot for power. We can
carry out the consultations with this [military] positioning, as long as
it does not have the political foundation to make an offensive...

Q: Is it true that you met with Camacho a few days ago?

M: No, we have not seen Camacho since the dialogue, and it is also a
lie that they have sent confidential communique's. Maybe they sent them
but they have not arrived. We haven't heard anything from Camacho since
the dialogue. He was waiting for the response of the consultations. We
were continuing the process, and then the Colosio thing happened, and now
we can do even less. Until now we knew that he was going to come [to Chiapas].
But I have had no contact with him, neither written nor public nor secret.

Q: What do you attribute this to?

M: To the fact that they are waiting until they regain their composure
as well. They were going with the Colosio option, negotiating, and, with
the change; they have to see how they can reposition themselves to see
what they will offer or what they are negotiating.

Q: What will be the conditions for returning to the dialogue, and will
you go down to the cathedral?

M: They will have to reproduce the military conditions previous to the
dialogue: One, the Army will have to loosen its presence; Two, the belligerence
of the ranchers, the merchants and the political class [will have to] decrease
as soon as possible to the point before the dialogue. This appears to be
very closely tied to the municipal presidents and the ranchers. That would
be enough. Of course, it would be a positive signal if Salinas would resign.

Q: Is it true that you want to speak with Zedillo?

M: No, I have never said that. I can give him some suggestions on how
to write text books, but I never said anything like that. The Committee
has not met since he was named, but most likely they will not speak in
favor of any candidate.

I have already stopped the candidates from coming. We are no longer
going to invite them, but we are ready to speak with a representative of
theirs. In that sense, we are prepared to speak to any representative.
What concerns us is that they go in there, and if anything should happen
to them, if any plane should fall on them... What I have said is that we
were ready to speak to any candidate, but I already cut that off, them
coming, since if anything happened to them, they would blame us. If it
happened to Colosio, well then the worse for any other candidate.
 
Section 3 

Emiliano Zapata will not die by Decree

[La Jornada, 4/11]
April 10, 1994

"The right to land, of those who work, it is inalienable."

To the people of Mexico:
To the people and governments of the world:
To the national and international press:

Brothers and Sisters:

The Clandestine Revolutionary Indigenous Committee-General Command of
the Zapatista National Liberation Army addresses you to say the following:

Today, April 10, is the 75th anniversary of the assassination of General
Emiliano Zapata. His cry of "Land and Liberty!" appeared to be drowned
by the treachery of Venustiano Carranza. Today the usurper Salinas de Gortari,
who calls himself "President of the Mexican Republic," lies to the people
of Mexico saying that his reforms of Article 27 of the Constitution reflect
the spirit of General Zapata. The supreme government is lying! Zapata will
not die by an arrogant decree. The right to land, of those who work it,
is inalienable, and the war cry of "Land and Liberty!" continues to have
a place in these Mexican lands, lands under the banner of neoliberalism,
which shadows our soil and imprisons and kills all of those campesinos
who struggle for their agricultural rights.

The Salinista reforms of Article 27 of the Magna Carta represent a treachery
to country, and the one responsible for this crime must be judged as a
usurper of the federal executive power in Mexico.

Brothers and sisters, today we mark 100 days of the new dawn of our
voice, in the mouths of the rifles of faceless men and women, the voice
of the landless campesinos, of the agricultural workers, of the small property
holders, of the Indigenous Mexicans. The voice of those who have nothing
and deserve everything had to follow the path of its smallest people, the
most humiliated, the most persecuted, the most forgotten. The voice of
the true people spoke, the voice of the Mexicans dispossessed of their
lands, of their dignity and of their history. Everything seemed to be lost
in the long night of our peoples. The earth gave nothing but pain and death.
But 10 years before this day, in our sorrowful lands, some planted the
hope of life, that it might return to the true people. In the Mexican mountains,
the seed of their word found a good place to be born. Their silence was
cultivated. Their step was the night, to become dawn later.

Then, in our dawn, "Enough!", the land gave the fruits of that planting.
Instead of pain was born rage; instead of humiliation came dignity; instead
of laments, weapons were reaped. Thousands of men and women climbed out
of the earth, from the same soil that only gave them poverty and the tender
fire that would inhabit their hands, they covered their faces, they erased
their pasts, they left behind their names and their lands, and began to
walk the path of war. None of us, men and women of the night path, have
a tomorrow. There will never again be any peace for our fears. Our bones
and blood will never again find rest.

For whom do these men and women walk? Who drinks their blood? For who
is the light of their words? For who is the death of their life? One hundred
days. Ten years. Who will now join hands with these men and women who can't
be here with you today. Who will now take the flag that their blood ripped
out of the hands of the powerful? Who will add their steps to their dignified
walk? Who speaks with them, with us, of voice and tender fury? Who will
shout with us? Who will not abandon us? Who will struggle with us? Who
will listen to our dead?

Not the usurper, whose arrogance is dispatched from the National Palace.
Not he who sells us out. Not those who kill us. Not those who dispossess
us? Not those who humiliate us?

You, brothers and sisters, yes. For you, our blood. For the night of
all, our timid light. For your life, our death. Our war for your peace.
For your ears, our words. Your pain, brothers and sisters, will find alleviation
in our struggle. For you, everything, brothers and sisters; for us, nothing.

Brothers and sisters, in front of you, in that palace where today the
lies reign, lives the man who denies everything to us and who has not been
asked to be there. The powerful gentleman, who takes away our lives every
day, should leave there. He must go, brothers and sisters. Nothing good
comes from his doors. There are lies on his face and his word lives in
deceit. He must go, brothers and sisters. This is the cry that comes from
the mountains. This is what our blood says. This is what our dead ask.
That he must go. Tell him this, brothers and sisters: That he must go!

Let no one else come to that palace that you have in front of you except
through the mandate of the majority. Let the one who sits in that chair
rule by obeying. Let the one who speaks from that balcony have truth in
his words. Let the one who is our leader be so by obeying. Tell him this,
brothers and sisters. This is what we want.

We cannot be with you this day, brothers and sisters. Our path is still
in the night on the mountain. Our face is still gagged; our word is still
far away. Take a moment, Mexican brothers and sisters! Give us a moment
of your voice and let our words speak from your mouth. In that same instant,
in the mountains of the Mexican Southeast, thousands of men and women with
negated faces, nameless and with no past, renew in their breasts the first
cry at the beginning of the year. Happiness is in our heart since Emiliano
Zapata has come again, in your steps, to the Zócalo of Mexico. We,
small and forgotten, raise the image of Zapata in the other heart of the
country: that of the mountains of the Mexican Southeast.

Greetings Mexican brothers and sisters! May our cry be yours:

Viva Emiliano Zapata!

Death to the supreme government!

Freedom!
Justice!
Democracy!

Respectfully,

From the mountains of the Mexican Southeast.
Clandestine Revolutionary Indigenous Committee-
General Command of the Zapatista National Liberation Army.
 
Section 4 

There Will Be no Peace Until There is Justice

[La Jornada, 4/11]
April 10, 1994

To the bases of support of the EZLN:
To the regular and irregular Zapatista combatants in the various arms
and services of the EZLN:

Compan~eros:

Today, April 10, 1994, we mark 75 years since the assassination of general
Emiliano Zapata, and 100 days of our just war against the evil Mexican
government.

As in 1919, we Zapatistas must pay with blood the price of our cry of
"Land and Liberty!" As in 1919, the supreme government kills us to stop
our rebellion. As in 1919, the land is not owned by those who work it.
As in 1919, arms are the only means left open by the evil government to
those without land.

For this reason we have risen up in arms. For this reason our compan~eros
have died in the last 100 days of our war. For this reason, today we dedicate
our best homage to those heroes and martyrs of the Zapatista struggle,
to the dead of eternity, who live in us. For this reason, today we say
again that we do not surrender, that we will not hand over our arms, that
there will be no peace until life is just and dignified, that we will not
stop fighting until all of the people of Mexico have democracy, freedom,
justice, independence, dignified housing, well-paid work, health care and
education. Until this is accomplished our armed steps will continue and
our flag will continue waving in the Mexican mountains.

Greetings, brother and sister Zapatistas!

Death to the supreme government!

Viva the Zapatista National Liberation Army!

From the mountains of the Mexican Southeast,
Clandestine Revolutionary Indigenous Committee-
General Command of the Zapatista National Liberation Army
Mexico, April 10, 1994
 
Section 5 

Votán Zapata lives in our dead

[La Jornada, 4/11]
April 10, 1994

To the people of Mexico:
To the people and governments of the world:
To the national and international press:

Brothers and Sisters:

The Clandestine Revolutionary Indigenous Committee-General Command of
the Zapatista National Liberation Army addresses you to speak its word.

In these moments, tens of thousands of men, women, children and old
people, Indigenous Mexicans all of them, are meeting on hundreds of ejidos,
ranches, and communities of the Mexican countryside. Our hands also reach
the heart of asphalt. Together with these people, we are united in front
of a tri-color flag, in whose center there is the image of an eagle devouring
a serpent. We are united by our shared misery, by the collective oblivion
into which we were relocated 501 years ago, by the useless death that we
suffer from, by our lack of faces, by having our names stripped from us,
by wagering our life and death on an unknown future. Together with all
these people, we are brought together by a collective desire in front of
this flag: to change, once and for all, this sky and soil, which is now
oppressed. To do this, we, the nameless and the faceless, the self-called
"professionals in hope," the most mortal of all "transgressors of injustice,"
those of us who are mountains, those who walk in the night, those who are
without voice in the palaces, who are the foreigners in their own land,
who are eternally dying, who are the dispossessed of history, who are without
a country and without a tomorrow, those of the tender fury, those of the
unmasked truth, those of the long night of disdain, those men and women
of truth... The smallest... The best... We must open again the door of
your filial heart that you can receive our words.

We must speak truth from our mouths; we must put our heart in our hands.
Brothers and sisters, we want you to know who is behind us, who directs
us, who walks in our feet, who dominates our heart, who rides in our words,
who lives in our dead.

We want you to know the truth, brothers and sisters, and it is like
this:

From the very beginning of that long night in which we died, according
to our most ancient grandparents, there was someone who collected our pain
and our oblivion. There was a man who, his words coming from far away,
came to our mountain and spoke with the language of the true men and women.
His walk was, and was not, of these lands. In the mouths of our dead, in
the voice of the wise elders, his words walked towards our heart. There
were, and still are, brothers and sisters, those who are and are not the
seed of this soil, who came to the mountain, dying, to live again, brother
and sisters. Those who lived lived by his heart dying from this walk, his
own but foreign, when he made his house in the mountain of the nighttime
roof. His name was and is of many things appointed. His tender word waits
and walks in our pain. He is, and is not, of these lands: Votán
Zapata, guardian and heart of the people.

Votán Zapata, light from afar, came and was born here in our
land. Votán Zapata, the appointed name again, always among our people.
Votán Zapata, timid fire who lived 501 years in our death. Votán
Zapata, name that changes, faceless man, tender light that gives us shelter.
Coming, Votán Zapata came. Death was always with us. Dying, hope
died. Coming, came Votán Zapata. Name without name, Votán
Zapata watched in Miguel, walked in Jose' María, was Vincente, was
named in Benito, flew in a bird, mounted in Emiliano, shouted in Francisco,
visited Pedro. Dying, he lived, named without name, in our land. Name without
name, living, came Votán Zapata to our land. Speaking, his word
fell into our mouths. Coming, he is. Votán Zapata, guardian and
heart of the people.

He is and is not all in us... He is underway... Votán Zapata,
guardian and heart of the mountain... Us... Votán, guardian and
heart of the people. He is one and many. None and all. Living, he comes.
Votán Zapata, guardian and heart of the people.

This is the truth, brothers and sisters. You should know it. He will
never die again in our life, and in our death he lives now and forever.
Votán, guardian and heart of the people. Without name he is named,
face without face, all and none, one and many, living dead. Votán,
guardian and heart of the people. Tapacamino bird, always in front of us.
Nothing walks behind us. Votán, guardian and heart of the people.

He took a name in our existence without name. He took the face of those
without faces. He is the sky in the mountains. Votán Guardian and
heart of the people. And in our unnameable, faceless path, he took a name
in us: Zapatista National Liberation Army.

With this new name, the nameless are named. With this flag gagging our
faces, all of us have faces again. With this name, the unnameable is named:
Votán Zapata, guardian and heart of the people.

The Zapatista National Liberation Army. Tender Fury that is armed. An
unnameable name. Unjust peace is transformed into war. Death that is born.
Anguish made into hope. Pain cries. Quiet shout. Our own present for an
unknown future. Everything for everyone, nothing for us. The unnamed, us,
the always dead. Us, foolish dignity, forgotten corner of our country.
Us, Zapatista National Liberation Army. Us, black and red flag beneath
the tri-color eagle. Us, the red star finally in our sky, never the only
star, but one more, the smallest. Us, only a look and a voice. Us, Zapatista
National Liberation Army. Us, Votán, guardian and heart of the people.

This is the truth brothers and sisters. This is where we come from.
This is where we are going. Living, he comes. Dying, death lives. Votán
Zapata, father and mother, brother and sister, son and daughter, large
and small, us, we are coming...

Receive our truth with a dancing heart. Zapata lives, for now and forever,
in these lands.

Greetings, fellow Mexicans!

Greetings, campesinos of this country!

Greetings, Indigenous people of all countries!

Greetings, Zapatista combatants!

Zapata, living he comes!

Dying, he lives!

Viva Zapata!

Democracy!
Freedom!
Justice!

From the mountains of the Mexican Southeast
Clandestine Revolutionary Indigenous Committee-
General Command of the Zapatista National Liberation Army.
 
Section 6 

Morelos Declaration, Tradition of Campesino Struggle

[La Jornada, 4/13]
April 10, 1994

To the signers of the Morelos Declaration [Declaración Morelense]:
Attention: Lieutenant Colonel Estanislao Tapia Sánchez:

From The Clandestine Revolutionary Indigenous Committee-General Command
of the Zapatista National Liberation Army, Mexico

Brothers and Sisters:

We have received the historical document called the Morelos Declaration,
sent out March 27, 1994 to the Mexican territory in struggle.

We, small and forgotten men and women, have seen how your words open
our heart with truth and dignity. In the greatest tradition of campesino
Mexican struggle, the Morelos Declaration follows the word of free dignity
of the Plan de Ayala and the Plan de Cerro Prieto which, in different times,
were put forth by our greatest historical leader and supreme general, Emiliano
Zapata, and General Rube'n Jaramillo. For that, we want you to accept the
military ranks that our Army truly recognizes.

Our walk is lightened and our flag flies higher when we read your words
of support for our Declaration of the Lacandona Jungle. For years, the
supreme government, which is now headed by the usurper in the National
Palace, has strangled in jail and blood the just word of all of the campesinos
and the Indians together. We have been dispossessed of land and water;
even the air no longer belongs to us. Our death is mute in these days.
We die by dying, Zapata and Jaramillo, in the Salinista reforms of Article
27 of the Constitution. Hope walks without rest, hope that our people have
left to us, hope to live and govern ourselves. Our strides are strange
on our first soil. Any foreign stride would offend our earth. Lying papers
stain our legitimate history. Our dignity is imprisoned in statues and
museums. Foreign vacations take our voice, and their poison kills our words
of truth. We have been alone, far from our people, and forgotten to each
other. Our death was deaf to the ears of the poor life that lives in us.

The two-faced ones thought that they had forever silenced our shouts.
They thought, the usurpers of the truth and givers of darkness, that our
dead were already dead. They were already celebrating our defeat and their
victory, in the arrogant loneliness of their palaces. Their lies danced
on the trampled truth. The world looked without looking. The country and
our hope were in a corner. Nothing moved inside of so much oppression.
Silence died, living in silence.

But in the absence of anything happening, our path led through nights
and mountains. Tender was the care we took with our fierce word. In near-
silence we spoke. The night was patient; a compan~era, a lover and
an accomplice. Small, we grew, and again we were new. Our path had good
direction, it was mute and coming, it was. For 10 years it was silent;
broken hope slowly maturing without speaking; only our word spoke.

In the dawn of the year, we without names had a new name, we without
faces had a face. Emiliano Zapata, our father, gave us his last name. Our
brother was the armed example made by Emiliano Zapata. Our child Zapata
asked us for a new future. A flag is what clothes our war path. Emiliano
Zapata, of the soil of our land, is the dignity of our history, the light
of our night, and always the clean morning of our hope.

Brothers and sisters, the evil government is still deaf to our voice.
Other voices are needed to open its ears. Your words make strong our shouts.

Viva Emiliano Zapata!

Death to the supreme government!

Greetings, brother and sister Zapatistas and Jaramillistas of Morelos!

Democracy!
Justice!
Freedom!

Respectfully,

From the mountains of the Mexican Southeast,
Clandestine Revolutionary Indigenous Committee-
General Command of the Zapatista National Liberation Army
April, 1994
 
Section 7 

The Story of Durito and the Defeat of Neoliberalism

[This story was written by Subcommander Marcos for a 10 year-old girl
who sent him a drawing.]

[La Jornada, 4/11]
April 10, 1994

To Mariana Moguel:

From: Insurgent Subcommander Marcos

Subcommander Mariana Moguel:

I greet you with respect and congratulate you for the new rank acquired
with your drawing. Permit me to tell you a story which, perhaps, you will
understand someday. It is the story of...

DURITO

I am going to tell you a story that came to me the other day. It is
the story of a small beetle who wears glasses and smokes a pipe. I met
him one day as I was looking for tobacco to smoke, and could not find any.
Suddenly, on one side of my hammock, I saw that a bit of tobacco had fallen
and formed a small trail. I followed it to see where my tobacco was, and
to see who the hell had taken it and was spilling it. A few meters away,
behind a rock, I found a beetle sitting at a small typewriter, reading
some papers and smoking a diminutive pipe.

"Ahem, ahem," I said, so that the beetle would notice my presence, but
he paid me no heed.

Then I said:

"Listen, that tobacco is mine."

The beetle took off his glasses, looked me up and down, and told me,
quite irritatedly:

"Please, captain, I beg you not to interrupt me. Don't you realize that
I am studying?"

I was a bit surprised and was going to give him a kick, but I calmed
myself and sat down to one side to wait for him to finish studying. In
a little while, he gathered up his papers, put them away in the desk, and,
chewing his pipe, said to me:

"Well, now, what can I do for you, captain?"

"My tobacco," I responded.

"Your tobacco?" he said to me. "You want me to give you a little?"

I started to get pissed off, but the little beetle handed me the bag
of tobacco with its little foot, and added:

"Don't be angry, captain. Please understand that tobacco cannot be found
here, and I had to take some of yours."

I calmed myself. I liked the beetle, and I said to him, "Don't worry
about it. I have some more over there."

"Hmm," he answered.

"And you, what is your name?" I asked him.

"Nebuchanedzar," he said, and continued, "But my friends call me Durito.
You can call me Durito, captain."

I thanked him and asked him what it was that he was studying.

"I'm studying neoliberalism and its strategy of domination for Latin
America," he told me.

"And what good is that to a beetle?" I asked him.

He replied, very annoyed: "What good is it? I have to know how long
your struggle is going to last, and whether you are going to win. In addition,
a beetle should care enough to study the situation of the world in which
it lives, don't you think, captain?"

"I don't know," I said. "Why do you want to know how long our struggle
will last and whether we are going to win?"

"Well, nothing has been understood," he told me, putting on his glasses
and lighting his pipe. After exhaling a mouthful of smoke, he continued:

"To know how long we beetles are going to have to take care that you
do not smash us with your boots."

"Ah!" I said.

"Hmm," He said.

"And to what conclusion have you come in your study?" I asked him.

He took out the papers from the desk and began to leaf through them.

"Hmm...hmm," he said every so often as he looked through them.

After having finished, he looked at my eyes and said, "You are going
to win."

"I already knew that," I told him. I added, "But how long will it last?"

"A long time," he said, sighing with resignation.

"I already knew that, too... Don't you know exactly how long?" I asked.

"It cannot be known exactly. We have to take into account many things:
the objective conditions, the ripeness of the subjective conditions, the
correlation of forces, the crisis of imperialism, the crisis of socialism,
etcetera, etcetera."

"Hmm," I said.

"What are you thinking about, captain?"

"Nothing," I answered. "Well, Mr. Durito, I have to go. It was my pleasure
to have met you. You may take all of the tobacco that you want, whenever
you like."

"Thank you, captain. You can be informal with me if you like." [In Spanish,
this is an invitation to use the familiar form of address, tu, instead
of the formal usted.]

"Thank you, Durito. I am now going to give orders to my compan~eros
that it is prohibited to step on beetles. I hope that helps."

"Thank you, captain. Your order will be of much use to us."

"Whatever happens, take much care, because my young men are very distracted,
and they do not always look where they are putting their feet."

"I will do so, captain."

"See you later."

"See you later. Come whenever you like, and we will talk."

"I wil,l" I told him, and went back to the headquarters.

That is all Mariana. I hope to know you personally someday and be able
to trade ski masks and drawings. All right.

Health and other colors, because on the ones that you used, the ink
must have run out.

Insurgent Subcommander Marcos,
Mountains of the Mexican Southeast.
April, 1994
 
Section 8 

The EZLN Promises Justice

[La Jornada]
April 12, 1994

To the people of Mexico:
To the people and governments of the world:

Brothers and Sisters:

The Clandestine Revolutionary Indigenous Committee-General Command of
the Zapatista National Liberation Army addresses you to denounce the following:

First: On the day of April 7, 1994, as he led a clearing of land for
the planting, the compan~ero Francisco Mena López was cowardly assassinated
by armed ranchers. The crime was committed near the Venustiano Carranza
ejido, Altamirano township, Chiapas.

Second: Francisco Mena López was killed from two shots, one to
the head, and the other to the mouth, both of them from a .38-special revolver.

Third: The ranchers named Arturo Espinoza, Juan Espinoza, and Jorge
Espinoza, owners of the El Miradero Ranch, Altamirano township, Chiapas,
are accused of this attack.

Fourth: The compan~ero Francisco Mena López was, at the time
of his death, leader of the local committee of our EZLN, and had been threatened
with death by ranchers of Altamirano before January 1, 1994, for his participation
in the struggle for agrarian justice.

Fifth: After the assassination, the now-accused took flight and hid
in the properties of their accomplices, ranchers of Altamirano, to escape
the Zapatista action of justice. As of today, they are still fugitives.

Sixth: With the complicity of the governmental authorities, the arrogant
ranchers of Altamirano have told the lie that the Espinoza family has been
kidnapped by elements belonging to our EZLN. Accustomed to exercising arbitrariness
and arrogance, the ranchers and the government think that our EZLN conducts
itself with the same injustice that we fight against. They try to injure
the prestige of our forces among the population, and a good number of small
property holders want to end up breaking the already-weak process of dialogue
and begin a military action against us.

Seventh: The EZLN, as opposed to the evil government, does not carry
out arbitrary detentions. The CCRI-CG of the EZLN has taken up the case
in the Zapatista tribunal of justice so that they may carry out an investigation
and allocate responsibility to those responsible for this crime. No Zapatista
judicial action will be carried out until the investigation underway has
real results.

Eighth: We reiterate that we are not affected by poor argumentations
that try to justify a military action against us. We are prepared to respond
to any attack, and to resist the aggression that the supreme government
prepares, to the last person.

Ninth: The process of consultation continues to be suspended. We will
not speak of peace while the signs of war continue.

Tenth: The EZLN reiterates to the people of Mexico their commitment
to conduct themselves with dignity, truth, and honesty, three weapons that
the usurper government will never be able to acquire.

Respectfully,

From the mountains of the Mexican Southeast,
Clandestine Revolutionary Indigenous Committee-
General Command of the Zapatista National Liberation Army
Mexico, April 11, 1994






LANIC Home | Zapatistas!






